Learn more: www.id.iit.edu

is a center for advanced study in human-centered innovation.

Founded as the New Bauhaus in 1937, Chicago’s Institute of Design, IIT

ILLINOIS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Institute of Design

Design Thinking: Driving Innovation

Charles L. Owen

September, 2006

Charles L. Owen Design Thinking: Driving Innovation

A web article written for:
The Business Process Management Institute
Web site: BPMInstitute.org
Section: Innovation; Topic: Papers; Subtopic: Articles
September, 2006
Keywords: innovation, design thinking, advanced planning, team
work, concept development

Adapted from a keynote speech given at the
International Conference on Design Research and Education
for the Future, Gwangju City, Republic of South Korea:
Gwangju Design Biennale, 2005.
Design Thinking. What It Is, Why It Is Different. Where It Has
New Value.

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology
Design Thinking: Driving Innovation
/ Charles L. Owen / September, 2006

2

Charles L. Owen Design Thinking: Driving Innovation

Abstract

Introduction

Innovation, a critical factor in
business competition, is a more
complex concept than many realize. Far more than principles,
rules and procedures, it is a
process most effective when imbued with attitudes and ways of
thinking that have evolved over
generations within the community of those who routinely
practice creative invention and
synthesis. Significant among
these are ways of thinking from
the design fields appropriately
referred to as "design thinking".

The word "innovation" is approaching the status of buzzword,
which is unfortunate because the concepts it covers—those that
drive it—are both significant and elusive. We can ill afford to let
them slip out of consciousness simply because the term that indexes them falls out of fashion. While it is still viable, then, a few
words about some of the more important of these innovation concepts. The ones I personally find most useful are gathered under
design thinking, a way of thinking that parallels other ways of
thinking—like science thinking—but offers a way of approaching
issues, problems and opportunities almost uniquely suited to innovation.
Creativity, of course, is of major importance to design
thinking—as it is to science thinking and thinking in any field.
But as is true for every field, characteristics other than creativity
are also important, and these are the elusive ones because they
tend to be less widely shared. Among others, I would nominate
the following from the field of design as significant and invaluable
to innovation:

3

Characteristics of Design Thinking

Human-centered Focus.
Science and, to a lesser extent, technology generally, have few
built-in governors. As in the arts, exploration proceeds where discoveries direct. Design, on the other hand, is client-directed. Design thinking must continually consider how what is being created
will respond to the client’s needs.
Environment-centered Concern.
In recent years, design thinking has acquired a second omnipresent, meta-level client: the environment. Present-day thinking puts
environmental interests at a level with human interests as primary
constraints on the design process. Sustainable design is one very
noticeable result. The ultimate value of human- and environmentcenteredness is the promise that the best interests of humankind
and environment will be considered in any project.

September, 2006

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

Conditioned Inventiveness.
Creative thinking for designers is directed toward inventing—as
opposed to discovering for the scientist. Designers tend to be more
interested in the "what" questions than the "whys" of interest to
science. Design creativity complements scientific creativity. However, design creativity must cover more than just invention. Design brings to invention a concern that what is produced not only
be inventive, but be so within the frameworks of human-centered
and environment-centered measures governing the designer’s efforts.

Charles L. Owen Design Thinking: Driving Innovation

Ability To Visualize.
Designers do much of their work visually. Designers can visualize ideas in a range of media,
bringing a unifying view to concepts otherwise
imagined uniquely by everyone in a discussion.
Designers can reveal the whole elephant that the
blind men only partially and imperfectly conceive.
Tempered Optimism.
It is difficult to work—and especially to work
creatively—in a pessimistic, critical mood. Designers are taught to recognize this and to establish optimistic and proactive ways of working.
Pronounced mood swings are not unusual among
creative individuals, but designers learn to control these to level out both lows and highs in the
interests of professionalism—designers must be
able to turn on enthusiasm on demand.
Bias for Adaptivity.
In recent years, the emergence of adaptive processes in manufacturing and information technologies has greatly reinforced a practice
historically followed by progressive designers:
the design of adaptive products able to fit their
users’ needs uniquely. Design thinking today has
accepted that concept, approaching problems
with the view that, where possible, solutions
should be adaptive—in production to fit the
needs of users uniquely, throughout their use to
fit users’ evolving needs.

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

4

Predisposition toward Multifunctionality.
Solutions to problems need not be monofunctional. Designers routinely look for multiple dividends from solutions to problems. This would
seem to be an obvious way to proceed, but it is
not. In a recent issue of Popular Science magazine, the cover story was six new technologies to
stop global warming. The story reported proposals made by the science community at a special
invited meeting with White House officials. All
six science proposals were serious proposals for
macro-engineering projects. Five of the six proposed single-valued means for relieving global
warming—at considerable cost, and with no additional benefits. The sixth, as an extension of a
technology already used for increasing natural
gas production, had that benefit, but no other. In
contrast, the three macro-engineering projects

proposed in the Institute of Design’s prize winning Project Phoenix (also reported in Popular
Science 14 years earlier) all had major economic
benefits in addition to their global warming benefits. Design thinking keeps the big picture (and
its opportunities) in mind while focusing on specifics.
Systemic Vision.
Design thinking is holistic. In the last forty
years, roughly since the computer began to influence design thinking, designers have moved to
considering problems more broadly. Modern design treats problems as system problems with opportunities for systemic solutions involving
mixes of hardware, software, procedures, policies, organizational concepts and whatever else is
necessary to create a holistic solution.
View of the Generalist.
Common wisdom today holds that the trend of
expertise is to greater and greater specialization
and, therefore, success will come more readily to
those who choose to specialize early and plan
their training accordingly. Design thinking, to the
contrary, is highly generalist in preparation and
execution. In a world of specialists, there is real
need for those who can reach across disciplines
to communicate and who can bring diverse experts together in coordinated effort. For inventive
creativity, the wider the reach of the knowledge
base, the more likely the creative inspiration. A
designer is a specialist in the process of design,
but a generalist in as wide a range of content as
possible.
Ability To Use Language as a Tool.
Language is usually thought of as means for
communication. For design thinking, it is also a
tool. Visual language is used diagrammatically to
abstract concepts, reveal and explain patterns,
and simplify complex phenomena to their fundamental essences. Mathematical language is used
to explore "what if" questions where feasibility
may be established by approximation—by calculations not exact, but close enough to support an
idea or change a line of reasoning. Verbal language is used in description where explanation
goes hand in hand with the creative process,
forcing invention where detail is lacking and expressing relationships not obvious visually.

Charles L. Owen Design Thinking: Driving Innovation

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

Facility for Avoiding the Necessity of Choice.
The job of the decision maker is to choose
among alternative proposals, usually the products
of different problem-solving approaches. Design
thinking takes the view that making that choice
is a last resort. Before moving to choice-making,
the designer looks for ways to "have your cake
and eat it too"—a seeming paradox (exactly what
you cannot do, as pointed out in the old English
proverb). The optimistic, adaptive designer, however, searches the competing alternatives for
their essential characteristics and finds ways to
reformulate them in a new configuration. When
this process is successful, the result is a solution
that avoids the decision and combines the best of
both possible choices.
Self-governing Practicality.
Design is a field in which inventiveness is
prized. In very few fields is there the freedom to
dream expected in design. The best design thinkers understand this and learn to govern flights of
fantasy with a latent sense of the practical. The
flight is to the outer reaches of what can be conceived; the tether is to ways that the conceivable
might be realized. This is embedded in a style of
thinking that explores freely in the foreground,
while maintaining in the background a realistic
appraisal of costs that can be met and functionality that can be effected.

Ability To Work Systematically with
Qualitative Information.
As design research has matured and design
methodology progressed, design processes with
component methods and tools have been developed and refined. As one such process, Structured Planning contains a tool-kit of methods for
a complete range of planning tasks covering
ways to find information, gain insights from it,
organize it optimally for conceptualization, evaluate results and communicate a plan to the public and follow-on teams in the development
process. Methods such as this are qualitative information handling techniques applicable to
many kinds of conceptual problems where complex system solutions are necessary or desirable.
They are usable by anyone working on a planning team, enabling systematic aspects of design
thinking to be accessible to all.

Into Play
These special characteristics of design thinking
are not normally discussed in a university catalog. Indeed, they are seldom taught explicitly.
Rather, they are acquired almost unconsciously
as tacit knowledge in school projects or on the
job.
Where they come into play most effectively
is in conjunction with other kinds of thinking
brought to the innovation process by those with
different values and training—from the physical
sciences, arts, political and social sciences, engineering, business, etc. Design thinking can be introduced as a service of design or planning
consultancies. But it can be made a more immediate part of the process if introduced by design
professionals actually members of the team; and,
most effective of all, it can be systemic if team
members are able individually to learn and practice its values.
In short, the innovation process can be improved significantly with design thinking. It can
be used by a team as an alternative way of thinking. It can be used for a team by a team member
trained as a design professional. And it can be
used away from a team in specialized support
projects conducted by design professionals to explore in detail issues and opportunities uncovered
in the innovation process.

September, 2006

Affinity for Teamwork.
Because designers work for clients, it is natural
that good interpersonal skills become part of the
professional set of tools they develop. An additional impetus toward teamwork has been a
movement in the professions over the last forty
years toward team-based design, spurred by developments in industry. Design thinking today is
highly influenced by this, and designers routinely
work closely with other designers and experts
from other fields. On multi-discipline teams, designers are a highly valuable asset because of
their characteristic abilities to generalize, communicate across disciplines, work systematically
with qualitative information, and visualize concepts.

5

