Learn more: www.id.iit.edu

is a center for advanced study in human-centered innovation.

Founded as the New Bauhaus in 1937, Chicago’s Institute of Design, IIT

ILLINOIS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Institute of Design

First Things First

Charles L. Owen

February, 2007

Charles L. Owen First Things First

A web article written for:
The Business Process Management Institute
Web site: www.BPMInstitute.org
Section: Innovation; Topic: Papers; Subtopic: Articles
February 16, 2007
Keywords: innovation, planning, development, concept, design

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology
First Things First
/ Charles L. Owen / February, 2007

2

Charles L. Owen First Things First

A major flaw in the advanced
development process is the failure of organizations to explore
adequately the concepts they
are about to develop. Development begins with an alreadyformed concept and proceeds
to the determination of how to
realize it. In a truly competitive
global business environment,
this won’t be good enough. Organizations will have to routinely obsolete their own
products to remain competitive
– and they will have to do so
with market-leading new concepts. To achieve this, it will be
necessary to reform the development process; a part of the
answer is a two-step process in
which the exploration of concept is given full attention. The
goal is concepts of reliably
high quality, generated predictably as they are needed.

Why is it that the "what" part of new product development gets
such scant attention in the development process? What a new
product should be is a question seldom seriously explored. In the
world of advanced planning, the notion of "concept" is pretty narrowly constrained. True development of a new concept more often
than not is ignored in favor of detailed investigation of variations
on already-formed ideas introduced intact at the beginning of the
process! The "concept" in this all-too-common model is most likely (1) a designated evolutionary replacement for a product already
in production, (2) a preconceived idea that has occurred to a senior executive, or (3) a competitor’s new offering whose qualities
must be met or exceeded. What happened to exploration and innovation at the concept level?
Competition
I am reminded of the old saw from operations research. A crack
mountain climbing team is assembled to break the world’s record
for climbing the highest mountain. With speed and efficiency they
quickly reach the top, only to gaze on a nearby higher mountain.
Moral: find the right mountain before you climb.
In a relaxed world, the team could move to the higher mountain and repeat their skillful climb. But in a highly competitive
world, another team might have already found that mountain. The
situation isn’t much different in the business world; there is little
time for conceptual mistakes.

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

Then

Home
Markets

Foreign Markets

Local
Company

Foreign
Company

Local
Competitor

Foreign
Company

Now

Home
Markets

Foreign Markets

Figure 1 Competition Has Increased Multifold

Competition in most business fields has increased multifold in the
years since World War II and the cold war. In the good old days,

February, 2007

Abstract

3

Charles L. Owen First Things First

The Development Process
I think the answer lies in rethinking how efforts
are distributed in the development process. If the
process is viewed as what takes place from initialization until achievement of a new product
specification, it usually now is a one-step process
in which the focus is the realization of a given
concept. The range of exploration is limited by
the commitment to concept, and the primary development activity is "giving form". Not unexpectedly, the innovations produced are at the
design detail and craftsmanship levels (see the
Quality Pyramid in my article, "Another Look at
Quality"). Innovative improvements in function,
human factors and cultural fit are examples of
the former; innovations to improve quality control in production are examples of the latter.
Reflecting on the experience of the mountain
climbers, development should be redefined as a
two-step process in which a separate, front-end
innovation effort is devoted to finding, exploring
and developing a concept (Figure 2). The concept in this model is a result—the end product of
a dedicated planning phase of the process. It is,
in essence, a highly refined charter or project
brief for a follow-on team that will conduct a

second designing phase of the development process.

One-step Development
Exploration

unknown

designing

How

known

to make it

Concept

Specification

time

Two-step Development
unknown

planning

Exploration

markets were relatively isolated and discrete. If
your company was in the U.S., your markets
were probably there too. and your competition
was most likely similarly contained. In our global economy, a company faces competition from
abroad in its home markets and probably has foreign branches of its own competing with foreign
companies in their home markets. And all this is
in addition to competition at home and now
abroad from local companies also with foreign
branches (Figure 1). The growth in competition
has not been linear.
Coupled with the dramatic increases in the
capabilities of information technologies, this has
put severe pressure on the development process.
To stay competitive, a company must now upgrade its product offerings at a frequency that
mandates almost continuous change. And that
doesn’t guarantee success. An obvious question
is, what can be done to improve product development effectiveness? Or better stated, how can
innovation be applied to the innovation process
itself to create products with greater return over
a longer life cycle?

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

4

designing

What

How

to make

known

time

to make it

Concept

Specification

Figure 2 First Things First: Concept Before Details

Concept vs Details
This model forces concentration on innovation at
the concept level where ideas can range broadly
and the revolutionary may be as likely as the evolutionary. In an environment where new ideas
are expected and sought out, an innovative concept is much more competitive than innovative
details. Witness Apple’s new iPhone, or from a
longer perspective, the Sony Walkman.
A good concept, however, doesn’t have to be
revolutionary. In fact, it is possible to get so far
in front of potential adopters that the concept
fails. The Xerox Star system that preceded
Apple’s Macintosh was too far ahead of its time.
It took Steve Jobs’ clear recognition of its value
as a concept and clearer view of how to develop
it to turn it into the interface system we all use
in various versions today.
So what makes a great concept? A great concept is complete; it has integrity. It also may be
surprising—better if it is. But for sure, it fits
needs and aspirations like a glove.
Needs and aspirations infer users, and meeting their expectations is a major part of what
builds integrity into a concept. We all hear about
designing for the "customer" and meeting the
needs of the "end user", but these users are but
two of many whose needs should be considered.
The customer is the buyer; the end user is the
operator. Meeting the needs of the user means

Charles L. Owen First Things First

Development for Today

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

So, first things first. A development process for
today needs first to put serious effort into finding
good concepts to develop. Back to the
mountaineers—finding the right mountain is a
prerequisite to winning the mountain climbing
award. The two-step process provides a much
more reliable means for establishing a concept
worth developing. At the concept level, exploration can be broad and the costs of changing direction are miniscule in comparison with course
changes later in the development process.
Development time need not be extended, either. Beginning with a concept carefully thought

out can be a time savior downstream. Schedule
extensions not uncommonly are traceable to mistakes resulting from uncertainties in how an initial concept should be interpreted. Combining a
conceptual planning phase with a detail designing phase shortened because it doesn’t have to
reinterpret and redevelop the concept typically
means no significant increase in development
time. In practice, it may actually shorten the time
because there are so many fewer opportunities
for wrong turns.
Using Structured Planning, a process for concept development, graduate student teams at the
Institute of Design routinely produce innovative
system concepts in fifteen weeks. My experience
in industry is that the process takes longer—
more like six months. The difference occurs because corporate planning team members usually
are on loan from their home departments and
have responsibilities there that continue to require their time.
Ultimately, the message is: when the competition is tough and competitors are numerous, a
company may well have to obsolete its own products. To do that successfully, it will have to
have concepts of reliably high quality ready predictably when they are needed. Reliability and
predictability are not the hallmarks of seat-ofthe-pants innovation. Getting the concepts right
and on time will require focused concept development, free ranging planning teams, and a planning process tailored to the job.

February, 2007

meeting the needs of these users—and: the user
who ships the product, sells it, cleans it, maintains it, repairs it, adapts it, recycles it and retires it, to name just some. To each the product
looks uniquely different.
Great concepts usually are also systemic in
that, besides meeting the needs of multiple users,
they have multiple ways of operating, embrace
multiple component elements, draw on multiple
functions, services, policies and organizational
constructs, and generally perform as you might
expect a system to perform. Systemic concepts
are hard to copy simply because they are complex. And this translates to longer life and greater return in a highly competitive market.

5

