Learn more: www.id.iit.edu

is a center for advanced study in human-centered innovation.

Founded as the New Bauhaus in 1937, Chicago’s Institute of Design, IIT

ILLINOIS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Institute of Design

Insight and Ideas

Charles L. Owen

February, 2008

Charles L. Owen Insight and Ideas

A web article written for:
The Business Process Management Institute
Web site: www.BPMInstitute.org
Section: Innovation; Topic: Papers; Subtopic: Articles
February 11, 2008
Keywords: innovation, planning, analysis, insight, design

Previous articles in the series:
Design Thinking: Driving Innovation, September 2006
Another Look at Quality, December 2006
First Things First, February 2007
Reforming the Development Process, May 2007
Goals and Definitions, July 2007
Covering User Needs, November 2007

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology
Insight and Ideas
/ Charles L. Owen / February, 2008

2

Charles L. Owen Insight and Ideas

Contrary to some thinking, obtaining insights usually requires hard work and persistent
questioning. Edison was right,
it is 99 percent perspiration.
That said, the pursuit of insight
is critical to innovation. Insights come as the recognition
of pattern—of cause/effect,
mechanism, structure, relationships, process. As penetrating
views, insights enable the planner or designer to create with
the elegance that comes from
understanding the structure of
a problem.
Design Factors are documents used in Structured Planning to capture insights and tie
them to ideas for their use. Insights are not data; insights
are information distilled from
data. The process of obtaining
insights is important and the
form in which they are stored
may make the difference between using and not using the
information ultimately in the
design process.
Design Factors contain
both insights and ideas; ideas
are sought at the same time
that insights are gained. A Design Factor is a qualitative information element, ready-made
for a qualitative knowledge
base able to preserve the why
information for a company or
institution.

Almost everyone is familiar with the famous Edison quote: "Genius is 1 percent inspiration and 99 percent perspiration". To know
much about Edison’s life, is to know that was certainly true for
him—and many other creative individuals when you take the time
to learn how they worked. Yet, there is still a strong sense among
many that great ideas come to the gifted in the way lightning
strikes, unpredicted and unexpected.
Insights as Idea Sources
In my experience, great ideas more likely come from great insight.
The insight may also seem to come suddenly, but it almost always
is preceded by solid spade work involving observation, experimentation, thoughtful reflection and search fueled by curiosity and almost relentless questioning. The analyst who repeatedly asks the
question, why, is most likely to be rewarded with insight.
It is through answering the why’s that we set foot on the trail
to insight. Insight is penetration, a view of the inner nature of
things. That view may reveal pattern—recognition that when certain conditions are present, particular events almost surely follow.
At other times, an insight may be more about mechanism, establishing how a cause or chain of causes generates a certain effect.
Sometimes it takes the form of structure or a model that shows
how phenomena relate to each other. It can also be about process
—the steps that lead one set of conditions to change to another.
As complex and mysterious as it is, getting an insight is not
anywhere near enough when it comes to planning or designing
systems. Complex systems consist of many designed elements and
relationships, all of which can benefit from insight. Understanding
a system’s potential users alone can provide a wealth of good insights easily able to shape innovative new directions. The problem
is capturing them and making sure they get into the planning process. How insights are transferred from the aha! event to a usable
form of information is an important part of the answer.
Some time, when you have an opportunity, ask about the research conducted for a project. Nine times out of ten you will get
some variant of this answer: "right over here", and a hand pointing
to a filing cabinet. In the filing cabinet will be reports, publications, ethnographic video tapes, copies of articles from journals,
photographs, web screen-dumps, downloads and a wealth of other
archived remnants of what was probably an extensive factgathering research activity. The problem is, this is data—
undistilled—in its original form. It may have had great value in
shaping the search, informing the planning team and even revealing insight, but in its original form, it does not enter the information stream in a way suitable to have impact in the several places
it should. Worse, if it is considered at all, important details are
likely to be forgotten, even mis-remembered.
Data is not information. Information acquires its value through
distillation, interpretation and the revelation of insight. At its best,
information has surprise, and one measure of its value is how
much. A crucial step in the analysis phase of planning is the rec-

February, 2008

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

Abstract

3

Charles L. Owen Insight and Ideas

ognition of insight and the thoughtful communication of it in a form usable in the information
flow.

the process, standardization is deliberately applied to the way in which information is presented, so that it can be readily contributed and
used by anyone working with the planning process. A Design Factor document actually contains more information than just an insight, but
we will get to that shortly. From the insight
standpoint, the information is distilled into an
Observation and its Extension.

An Insight Document: The Design Factor
In Structured Planning, insights are thought
through on one-page documents called Design
Factors (see the Figure). As in other phases of

Design Factor

Title:

Project

Getting Around

Name of the project:

Mode

Use

Mode of operation
or behavior:

Activity

Waiting

Activity under the Mode:

Originator
Original producer (sponsor)
of this document:

M. Gardner

Contributors
Contributors of additions and/or changes

Descriptive label for problem
or insight (not solution). Exactly
as on Activity Analysis form:

Number

Old Equipment Charm identifier
24

Source/s

Associated Functions

Give complete reference information.
Use The Chicago Manual of Style for
format.

The Function or Functions to which this
information applies. Should appear
exactly as on the Activity Analysis form
so that there is no confusion.

Examples:

The System of Wire-Cable
Railways for Cities and
Towns. San Francisco:
Pacific Cable Railway Co.,
1887.

Examples:

Reinforce positive attitudes
Occupy waiting passengers’
time

Souter, Gerry. Some Unabashed Reminiscences and
an Audacious Proposal.
Chicago Guide (July 1971):
12.

21 Sep., 1971

P. Gleye

22 Sep., 1971

M. Gardner

If personal knowledge only, use:

2 Oct., 1971

M. Gardner

Personal Observation

Observation

Extension

A succinct sentence encapsulating recognized or
observed phenomena with relevance for the
project. Should strive to capture an insight, either
about what goes right or what goes wrong. Leave
the details for the Extension.

Background, discussion, examples, quotes, causal relationships, tendencies—
anything that can add to an understanding of the insight. Try to anticipate why? and
what do you mean? questions here. There should be little question about the
insight that the Observation highlights after reading this section. This is the section
that provides the "qualitative knowledge" for the project—ultimately, why things will
be designed the way they will be, so make it thorough, insightful and sharp!
Reference a source at the end of a sentence or paragraph, e.g., (Souter 1971, 12)

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

4

Example:

Example:

Ill-maintained equipment drives
riders away; well-maintained old
equipment often may attract them.

Ill-maintained equipment gives patrons the impression of
slovenliness and neglect. It reduces patronage by those who
have alternative choices. In fact, poor maintenance is largely
due to the severe financial problems transit systems have
come to face. Many systems have insufficient revenue to
replace obsolete equipment, even through maintenance costs
rise rapidly as equipment approaches (or exceeds) its normal
service life (Souter 1971, 12).
On the other hand, well-maintained, old equipment can
attract new riders and please old ones. The San Francisco
cable cars, for example, have a charm unequaled by modern
apparatus (System of Wire-Cable Railways 1887). Doubledecked buses were used in Chicago until the 1950’s, and
Chicago at one time had the world’s longest cable railway,
moving at up to 13 miles per hour and carrying as many as
100,000 passengers a day (Souter 1971, 12).

Design Strategies

Solution Elements

Topical strategies for how to use the insight above.
Should suggest directions for specific idea
concepts in the Solution Elements section.

Specific ideas. Should be well enough conceived to be capable of evaluation against
all Functions for whether they support or obstruct fulfillment. There can be many,
one or none for any specific Design Strategy. Existing Solution Elements exist
from earlier work. Modified Solution Elements are suggested modifications of
existing elements. Speculative Solution Elements are new proposals. Work back
and forth creatively between Strategies and Solution Elements (general <=>
specific). Invent evocative names both appropriate and memorable.

Some general strategies to seed your thinking:
Avoid the problem
Isolate the problem

Sharpen the concept
Combine the concept

Specify status:

E Existing M Modified

Use imperative verb phrase format: <verb>
<optional modifiers> <object> <optional modifiers>

Use noun phrase format: <adjective> <noun or noun phrase>.

Examples:

Examples:

Care for equipment

S

Identity-Element Maintenance Crews

Emphasize charm

M

Highlighted Antiques

Version

4

S Speculative

Form: 5/19/1998

Date: 2 October, 1971

Date of first version: 19 September, 1971

Observations are succinct, usually one-sentence
statements expressing the essence of the insight.
In "Covering User Needs", I introduced the idea
of Observations as qualitative information elements and the evolution of their form through
experiments with different formats seeking greater information content and more natural grammar. A form we use frequently introduces a
condition and then completes a pattern by noting
the effect that the condition typically produces.
For example: "While moving through open
spaces, crew members may inadvertently contact
equipment with their feet." This was a surprise
to the designers of Space Lab; switches were
being turned on and off unintentionally! We
picked up this insight from their reports and used
it in work we did for NASA on Space Station.
The form of the Observation isn’t rigidly
constrained to the condition/effect format, however. As long as there is insight, the statement
has value. An example of another form is the
Observation from the Design Factor in the Figure: "Ill-maintained equipment drives riders
away; well-maintained old equipment often may
attract them." This had direct bearing on concepts that we developed for Chicago’s CTA transit system.
The Extension section of the Design Factor is
used to carry on the discussion. Experience has
shown that considerable value derives from distilling an insight to a single sentence. Through
this process, what is important and not so important gets sorted out. But communication may
also suffer from the distillation, and we found
ourselves far too often asking "why" and "what
do you mean by that" questions of Design Factor
originators. The result was the Extension section,
where these kinds of questions can be answered,
and the insight augmented with additional information on causes, effects, relationships, contexts,
associations, etc. that help to explain why the
phenomenon exists.
Combining Insight and Ideas
The Design Factor document, as earlier suggested, also contains other useful information. Contrary to the design model that suggests that the
path of development progresses neatly from analysis to synthesis to evaluation in discrete steps,
Structured Planning is much less firmly parti-

tioned. During the information gathering activity,
when understanding and insight are being sought,
the analyst is expected to think about solutions
in the midst of finding problems—and to apply
some practical screening at the same time as a
preliminary form of evaluation. Thus, the Design
Factor document in one place contains ideas as
well as insight. The document’s design takes inspiration from the fact that when an insight
about a problem is gained, it is often easiest then
to see solutions for it.
The bottom half of the Design Factor form is
devoted to ideas. On the left, the view is strategic. In the document in the Figure, two strategies
are given for using the insight that wellmaintained old equipment can have charm: (1)
care for old equipment, and (2) emphasize its
charm. On the right, ideas for specific implementation of the strategies are given names as titles
for "solution elements"—potential component
concepts for a system solution: Identity-Element
Maintenance Crews (teams that would be assigned to specific equipment to maintain as their
own), and Highlighted Antiques (older devices,
equipment and environments spotlighted with
placement, lighting, painting and other attentionawarding means). The titles are place-holders for
more detailed discussions and explanations documented separately. In my next article I will talk
more about this and how best to capture ideas
quickly and efficiently when they occur.
Insight is the motive force. In advanced planning for system concepts, hundreds of insights
are needed. The reward is true innovation across
the system. Making the effort to distill data to
information and to standardize its communication
has a big payoff. And the payoff continues beyond the project. Companies and institutions
across the country lose highly valuable information every day as employees retire, change jobs
and otherwise move within the organization or
leave it. The data stays—the memos, plans, reports, drawings—but the reasons why things
were done the way they were, disappear. The
qualitative information—the why’s, the
insights—go. Probably billions of dollars worth
of information are lost every year because there
is no qualitative knowledge base to match the
quantitative systems that most companies and institutions possess.
Design Factors are elements of that kind of
knowledge base.

5

February, 2008

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

Charles L. Owen Insight and Ideas

