Learn more: www.id.iit.edu

is a center for advanced study in human-centered innovation.

Founded as the New Bauhaus in 1937, Chicago’s Institute of Design, IIT

ILLINOIS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Institute of Design

International Design Institutes

Charles L. Owen

June, 2007

Charles L. Owen International Design Institutes

Published in part previously in:
CIDI. An International Design Institute for Chicago
Charles L. Owen. Chicago: Institute of Design,
Illinois Institute of Technology, 2004.

Keywords: design institute, design center, design thinking, design
communication, design recognition

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology
International Design Institutes
/ Charles L. Owen / June, 2007

2

3

Abstract

Introduction

Design is the future. Around
the world, countries and communities, institutions and industries are discovering the value
of design: the enabling difference in a world of truly accessible products, communications,
services, experiences and ideas.
What is design?
–good design?
–design research?
How do you do design?
–judge design?
–manage design?
–use design?
The public need for answers
is evidenced by a wave of design centers now appearing in
countries worldwide. But the
challenge is significantly greater than what these efforts are
currently addressing—in
breadth and depth.
The problems of the 21st
century are difficult and immediate. The best minds of all
fields will be needed. Design,
as a field, has particular
strengths that will be essential.
To exploit them fully, the value
of these strengths must be communicated and their reach extended. Erected for this
purpose in regionally important
major cities, international design institutes will be a significant force in a movement of
research, education and communication.

Our present century will be eventful by any previous standard.
Population growth, the deep underlying force, will peak at somewhere near 10 billion from a figure less than two-thirds of that
now; nearly all the additional population will be from developing
countries. The resources necessary to bring them to acceptable
standards of living, along with the billions already living in substandard conditions, will put unprecedented stress on energy and
water supplies, to mention just two of our strained natural resources.
Complicating this will be global warming, brought on by the
needs of the growing billions. Expenditures to adapt to climate
change and recover from the excesses of extreme climate and
weather events will sap governments’ ability to deal with fundamental problems.
New ways will have to be found to live and work. The challenge will be to live well with less—to bring new technologies
into service that can directly address energy production and water
purification; to create sustainable tools, equipment, structures and
cities that ask less of the environment; and to do all this without
sacrificing the quality of life that has been achieved in the developed countries.
The many disciplines of design will have their work cut out.
To achieve success and public acceptance, the value of their work
will need to be communicated widely. And the image of design as
either an esoteric technical process layers below common understanding or an inspired art form shaping the ephemeral fashions of
the moment will have to be changed. Design thinking will have to
be explained for what it is: a way of thinking about issues, problems and possibilities with its own full range of goals, values, processes and measures. Most importantly, the value of design
thinking in consort with other forms of thinking must be communicated. Beyond traditional political, economic and business advice, public policy makers will need all the advice they can
get—certainly science advice, and given the need for ideas, invention and vision for reshaping the built environment—design.
Concept
An International Design Institute is an information-age, multichannel institution proposed to meet global demands for research,
education, information and communication about design. It has a
place, usually a major regional or national city, but it is international in intent, scope and operation. It is also multidisciplinary:
drawing on the arts, humanities, technologies and sciences, and
cross-communicating knowledge among all fields of design.
The building housing an institute as well as the institute’s
operation—and the operations of the educational, research and
communication programs within it—are living demonstrations of
what good design can contribute to business, society and environment. From its first exterior impressions, it communicates thoughtful, advanced design thinking. Its sustainable design features are
examples for how to build with minimal environmental impact.
Throughout, its adaptive systems show how infrastructure

June, 2007

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

Charles L. Owen International Design Institutes

Charles L. Owen International Design Institutes

can be tailored and retailored to changing needs
with minimal new demands on resources. Its advanced information technologies demonstrate effective and efficient ways to maximize
productivity across a wide variety of creative activities. The synergistic interplay of its many
component elements demonstrate the systemic
advantages to be gained from an organization
planned for interaction.
Elements in Summary

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

4

• Hall of Recognition (regional, national and
international design awards)
• Design Museum (historically good design
in context)
• Graduate Design-education Facility
(anchoring research and educational activity)
• Design Research Facility (research visibly in
progress)
• Design Communication Center (public
communication of design with value)
• Conference Facilities (a professional and
public gathering center)
• Design Library (collecting design-related
information from all disciplines)
• Design Bookstore (a market for design-related
information from all disciplines)
• Design Store/s (a source for well-designed
products)
• Offices for Design Associations (a design
professional center)
• Corporate Design Showrooms (companies
noted for good design)
• Design Consultancies (offices of leading
professional consultants)
• Apartments/Condominiums (residences rented
or sold to friends of design)
• Guest Room Hostel (minimal short-term, low
cost residence)
• Restaurants (imaginative food and environment)
• Computer Utility (servers, systems and support
for networked communications and IDI
operations)
Elements in Detail
The elements of an international design institute
(IDI) each supply a special portion of the design
resource. Integrated, they form a complete, working design culture openly available as a resource
locally and accessible worldwide through a
growing network of similar institutions.

Hall of Recognition
Individuals prominent for their contributions to
design practice, theory and education are honored here. Design Awards carry with them significant prizes equivalent to those awarded for
major achievements in any field. Separate awards
are given in each of the major design disciplines,
including engineering design, design planning,
product (industrial) design, environmental design,
communications (graphic) design, architecture,
interior design and other forms of design as appropriate for the activities of the region. Awardees receive the recognition accorded winners of
highly regarded national and regional prizes,
with the intention that youth will be inspired to
emulate the accomplishments of these leaders in
design.
Design Museum
A permanent collection of the world’s best design in each of the areas recognized is maintained here. Study collections, available to local
and international scholars, trace the evolution of
design in many fields. Permanent and temporary
exhibits not only present the best of new design
thinking, but take those new to design thinking
step by step through the thought process of the
designers and the impact of their designs. Traveling shows are assembled and sent out regionally
and worldwide from the Design Museum. The
Hall of Recognition is a prominent exhibit in the
museum.
Graduate Design Education Facility
The graduate program of a major locally situated
university or a Center uniting elements of the
graduate programs of cooperating local universities is located permanently here as the anchoring
activity. The vitality of a facility always alive
with activity affects all aspects of an IDI’s behavior. Students, faculty, visiting scholars and researchers enrich activities—forming a working
population that energizes the institute and sets an
exciting pace for casual visitors as well as participants on site for professional purposes.
Design Research Facility
High level resources and capabilities underpin research programs at an IDI. Guided in principle
by human-centered focus and environmentcentered concern, programs funded by government, foundations, institutions and industry
explore better ways to provide services, systems,
environments and artifacts for a changing world.

5

Development of better methods, theory and processes of design goes hand in hand with application of them to sustainable, resource-conservative
design. An IDI’s programs form regional nuclei
and examples for research efforts in local institutions and universities. Design processes, methods
and tools developed here are introduced to local
design consultancies and corporate design departments as part of a technology diffusion program
for continuing education and development.

posing content from all fields as it pertains to categories of design interest. Media of all forms
are respected, and—as permissible legally—important documents from one medium may be
converted to others to maximize the usability of
the information. Through the network maintained
by the Design Communication Center, libraries
in other IDI’s have access to many materials as
easily as do local users, and local users, in return, have similar access to distant resources.

Design Communications Center
A Design Communications Channel uses the Internet to connect design professionals, educators
and researchers locally and worldwide in an information network tailored to the needs of planning and design. Through its Design Communication Center, an IDI is a node on that network,
acting as a supplier as well as receiver of information. As receiver, it provides access to worldwide cultural information as it is reflected in the
local designs of many countries. With its information bases and multi-media communications,
it is also a cultural supplier of knowledge about
design and design history locally, and it is a
window to the latest methods and theory of design as well as the computerized tools of design
technology. As a local supplier, it offers a host
of design information services for schools (primary, secondary and tertiary), the public, and the
professional community.

Design Bookstore
Just as the design category is missing in the library, it is missing, too, in most bookstores. The
Design Bookstore is the commercial mirror of
the Library, assembling representatives of all that
can be purchased in new and used design books
and other media products from around the world.
Browsing through the Internet is possible, and
orders can be taken for shipment worldwide. As
does any bookstore, the Design Bookstore communicates to the public, in this case with an unparalleled concentration of the ideas of design.

Conference Facilities
In consonance with its role as a major center for
design knowledge, an IDI has conference halls
and specialized meeting facilities with technological support for multi-lingual, local, national and
international conferences on design. These, with
the institute’s educational and research facilities
and the city’s own exhibition and conference facilities, make city-wide—even metropolitan—extendible exhibits possible as well as combinedsponsor, shared exhibits, conferences and events
optimized to the interests of a wide range of potential sponsors, conferees and attendees.
Design Library
Design is a category not found often in libraries
because its content is spread among many categories. An IDI’s Design Library brings together
all that can be assembled about design, reversing
traditional notions of categorization and juxta-

Design Store/s
Besides books and other communications, an International Design Institute will be expected to
be a source for the latest and "best" products of
design. Design Stores within the IDI fill that
need. A number of countries now annually award
"Good Design" status to selected products. In
conjunction with the design professional societies
and as part of its own recognition activities, an
IDI may also participate in this recognition process. Making the products thus singled out available to the public are the specialized Design
Stores. Because well-designed products are not
always the global products of multinational companies, they may be difficult to obtain locally;
IDI Design Stores frequently may be the only
local source.
Offices for Design Associations
National offices for professional design associations logically are located at an IDI where they
can have direct access to the research, communications and professional resources they need. as
well as a public interested in design. Provided
space at low rental rates, they, in turn, open
channels to the thousands of professionals and
educators, students and friends of their individual
disciplines.

June, 2007

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

Charles L. Owen International Design Institutes

Charles L. Owen International Design Institutes

Corporate Design Showrooms
Design, in its most traditional role, serves commercial purposes. The products of design are
often for sale, and can benefit significantly from
being recognized as "good design". An IDI provides a venue for industries highly regarded for
their design to help show off their wares. Corporate showrooms are discreetly rented to those
corporations most identified with good design.
The attainment of a showroom at an IDI may be
regarded as a reward in itself for good design.
For the IDI, a subtle benefit is the commercial
evidence that good design pays off, and the public learns also that products they like, they may
like for a reason.
Design Consultancies
A strong addition to the "working environment"
ambiance of an IDI is the presence of the offices
of highly regarded design consultants. A select
group of design consultants representing a variety of design disciplines is permitted to rent
space in the IDI complex. Design consultancies
typically work with a variety of projects covering a wide range of topics. The interaction of
consultant staff with design educators and researchers continually opens new vistas for all.

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

6

Apartments/Condominiums
As space permits, a limited number of apartments and/or condominiums may be constructed
in an IDI complex. Their existence and the presence of their inhabitants further strengthen the
vitality of the IDI community. Living close to
work is growing in desirability, and residence in
the IDI with its workplace and amenities is highly desirable for any associated with work activities in the IDI, but also for many who appreciate
the special qualities of a well-designed environment.
Guest Room Hostel
Visiting scholars, researchers and students are
able to rent rooms in the IDI’s minimal, highly
functional hostel. Rooms are designed to provide
basic sleeping and hygiene facilities at very low
cost. For any working traveler, finding reasonable lodgings close to the place of temporary
work is usually daunting, often just not possible,
especially in the city. An IDI’s hostel hotel is a
doubly welcome shelter for those who only need
a place to sleep and refresh and have little time
for commuting.

Restaurants
Completing the response to community needs,
restaurants in the IDI both provide convenience
for those working or visiting, and dining with a
"difference" for lunch and dinner-goers attracted
by good design. Restaurateurs are selected for
their commitment to the principles of experiment, invention and style expected in an environment concerned with design.
Computer Utility
Linking and supporting all activities in the IDI
and supporting the operating environment is a
central computing and control utility. Necessary
for many functions required by teaching, research and communication, the computing resource is extended as a utility to all facilities in
the complex. High-speed, high-bandwidth access
to all multi-media information and the services
of the Design Channel add significantly to the
desirability of using, working in, and living in
the institute.
In its role as control utility, the system plays
a major role in the management of the IDI’s responses to changes in the environment. With a
goal of zero environmental impact, constant fine
tuning of energy, water and resource control systems is necessary. Sensors and actuators throughout the facility work in harmony for this
purpose, and the adaptive construction features
of the IDI’s structure allow maximum ranges of
adjustment.
Background and Additional Reading
This subject and the closely related subject of
the value of design thinking have been studied at
the Institute of Design since 1990. Some selected
papers, projects and reports are listed below. In
recent years, electronic versions have been posted in pdf form on the Institute of Design web
site: www.id.iit.edu. Where this is the case, the
paper or project is marked **.
1. CIDI: An International Design Institute
for Chicago. Paul Siebert, Karl (Zhe-Ru) Du
and Toshimas Yamanaka. Chicago: Institute of
Design, Illinois Institute of Technology, 1990.
2. The International Design Institute: Considering the Future of the Institute of Design.
Jeff Gershune, Sean Gaherty, Brad Nemer and
Ameresh Viswanathan, Chicago: Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology, 2003.

7

Charles L. Owen International Design Institutes

7.** Design Thinking. Four Projects that
Explore How Design Thinking Can Be Extended to New Levels of Service for Institutional
and Policy Planning: Education for Policy Design Synthesis. Sarah Nelson, Steven Babitch,
Enric Gili Fort, Yanin Kasemkosolsri and Christine Kim. A Research Initiative for Policy Design Synthesis. Derrick Kiker, Clinton Barth,
Hyuniee Jung, Gil-Ock Lee and Rishabh Singh.
A Campaign for Policy Design Synthesis. Pam
Nyburg, Seungho Chung, Dan Greene, Randy
MacDonald and Min Ouyang. A Natural Systems Institute. Mark King, Joyce Chen, Henning
Fischer, Matthew Lennertz and Waewwan Sitthisathainchai (the last project demonstrates how
design thinking can help in institutional advanced policy planning). Chicago: Institute of
Design, Illinois Institute of Technology, 2005.
8.** Design Thinking: Notes on Its Nature
and Use. Charles L. Owen. Design Research
Quarterly. 1, No. 2 (December 2006): 17-28.

June, 2007

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

3. CIDI. An International Design Institute for
Chicago. Charles L. Owen. Chicago: Institute of
Design, Illinois Institute of Technology, 2004.
4.** Responsible Design. Achieving Living
Excellence: Implications, Warnings and a Call to
Action. Charles L. Owen. In eDesign2004. Proceedings of the International Conference on
Environmental Design for Living Excellence:
Contemporary Issues and Solutions, 1-3. Keynote address, Shah Alam, Selangor, Malaysia:
Universiti Teknologi MARA, 2004.
5.** Societal Responsibilities. Growing the
Role of Design. Charles L. Owen. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Planning
and Design. Creativity, Interaction and Sustainable Development, 1-18. Keynote address,
Tainan, Taiwan: National Cheng Kung University, 2005.
6.** Design Thinking. What It Is. Why It Is
Different. Where It Has New Value. Charles L.
Owen. In The Future of Design Education &
Research. Proceedings of the 2005 KSDS Fall
Conference and International Conference on
Design Education and Research. 5-20 (in Korean), 93-112 (in English), Keynote address,
Gwangju City, Republic of Korea: Korean Society of Design Science, Gwangju Biennale Foundation, and Chosun University, 2005.

