Learn more: www.id.iit.edu

is a center for advanced study in human-centered innovation.

Founded as the New Bauhaus in 1937, Chicago’s Institute of Design, IIT

ILLINOIS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Institute of Design

Organizing for Innovation

Charles L. Owen

November, 2008

Charles L. Owen Organizing for Innovation

A web article written for:
The Business Process Management Institute
Web site: www.BPMInstitute.org
Section: Innovation; Topic: Papers; Subtopic: Articles
November, 2008
Keywords: innovation, planning, structure, relationships, design

Previous articles in the series:
Design Thinking: Driving Innovation, September 2006
Another Look at Quality, December 2006
First Things First, February 2007
Reforming the Development Process, May 2007
Goals and Definitions, July 2007
Covering User Needs, November 2007
Insight and Ideas, February 2008
Capturing Ideas, April 2008
Using the Tools of Structure June 2008

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology
Organizing for Innovation
/ Charles L. Owen / November, 2008

2

Charles L. Owen Organizing for Innovation

Information is almost always
organized categorically. Characters for classification are abstracted from intrinsic qualities
of the information, and information elements are associated
by their likeness, or similarity,
on these characters.
For innovation, this kind of
organization is not appropriate.
Creative thinking thrives on the
imaginative leaps triggered by
counterintuitive juxtapositions
of information. Information derived and organized categorically lacks these juxtapositions.
For creative synthesis, a new
kind of measure is necessary,
along with appropriate forms
for the information elements to
be organized and the discrimination variables to do the organizing.
An Interaction Measure is
presented that associates Functions, as the information elements, using Solution Elements
(ideas) as extrinsically pertinent discrimination variables.
The interaction measure associates Functions by establishing
reinforcement where Solution
Elements support fulfillment of
two Functions, or conflict
where Solution Elements support fulfillment of one Function, but obstruct fulfillment of
the other.

How should information be organized? Better yet, how should it
be organized for innovation?
The conventional way to organize almost anything is to look
for similarities and put like items together in categories. Sometimes the categories are predefined, and the likenesses among
items are established by reference to the characteristics of the category. Sometimes (as in numerical taxonomy) the categories are
post-defined by the natural grouping of like objects based on selected intrinsic characteristics. The characteristics, or characters,
become variables, attributes or "keys" for classification. A number
of measures of similarity have been developed for clustering subjects in this way.
A somewhat different, but closely related problem, is: How
can information most easily be found? Here, the value of categories is apparent; if it is known how something is likely to be classified, the item can be retrieved readily by looking through the
category. Keywords help to navigate the categories.
Surprisingly, the problem that is seldom addressed is whether
organization by categories of intrinsic likeness is the best way to
deal with a particular kind of information! People use information
in different ways. For those whose job it is to plan, design and
invent, the kind of information needed at the moment isn’t always
so obvious. Interesting results often come from a process that is
more serendipitous than algorithmic because counterintuitive juxtapositions often lead to creative solutions. Seeing the right things
together sparks innovation.
To arrive at a model that will serve these users well, three aspects of information structuring need to be reconsidered. First, the
means of association—what kind of measure of association should
be used to put elements of information together optimally for innovation? second, the form of information—what form should information elements take to be most useful in the conceptual
development process? and third, what kinds of characteristics or
discriminants should be used to create the organization? A good
answer for the first question would allow information to be organized in a way natural to the inventing process. A good answer for
the second would establish a format for describing information elements uniformly. And a good answer for the third would provide
a sound basis for creative association.
A Special Measure of Association
Considering first the problem of association, the objective should
be to link information elements, as subjects, in such a way that
considering one leads the planner to another that he or she should
consider at the same time. This should not come out of some intrinsic likeness possessed by the subjects, but rather from meaningful, important factors—probably extrinsic—that are relevant to
the design process.
The distinction is subtle. An example from nature will help to
get started: a conventional measure of association like similarity
would link monkeys to monkeys and parrots to parrots in the
world of animals. A biologist would not expect to find a parrot to

November, 2008

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

Abstract

3

Charles L. Owen Organizing for Innovation

be similar to a monkey because the underlying
mechanism of association, biological similarity,
works on the principle that living things are related that have like intrinsic physical characteristics. On the other hand, a planner concerned with
the design of a zoo might see particular species
of monkeys and parrots naturally associated because they share the same habitat or because
they eat the same foods. In the first case, the association is built around likenesses inherent in
characteristics intrinsically possessed by the subjects; in the second it derives from extrinsic
characteristics otherwise unassociated with the
subjects except for the analyst’s purposeful selection.
From this idea, that two subjects can be associated on the basis of how they are related to external factors or entities, a special measure of
interaction can be constructed. The measure can
recognize not only agreements (e.g., that certain
species of both monkeys and parrots favor rain
forest environment), but disagreements (e.g., that
a parrot species and a monkey species might
react oppositely to a food; edible and desirable
for one, sickening for the other), and even independence (e.g., that a parrot species might use a
certain nesting material irrelevant to a monkey
species that does not build nests). The measure
has direct application to planning.
Information Elements

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

4

In my article, Covering User Needs, I showed
how a design/planning problem can be modeled
as a set of Functions specified systematically as
a Function Structure is created. Described with
verb phrases such as, "distribute heat evenly"
and "recognize done condition" (from a cooking
Activity within a food preparation Mode of a
House of the Future Project), Functions such as
these—in the hundreds—provide a simple form
of criteria thoroughly covering a problem. Functions must be fulfilled well in a successful solution. The Function Structure, with its
categorically derived major Modes of operation,
Submodes, Activities and Functions would also
seem to provide an ideal framework for creating
and synthesizing ideas.
It does not. While categorical derivation
works beautifully for analysis, it creates an organization almost diametrically opposed to the
needs of creative synthesis. Creativity thrives on
unexpected juxtapositions. Categorical derivation

maintains subject conformity. Continuing the
housing analogy, a functional analysis of a house
might have, among others, such major modes of
operation as Water Management, Power Distribution and Space Creation. Functions concerning
plumbing would show up under Water Management; functions concerning support of floors and
ceilings would appear under Space Creation;
those concerning electrical wiring would be
under Power Distribution. The point is, nowhere
would there be a place where they might show
up together—and, thus, the idea that a structural
column might also be a conduit for wiring and/or
a vertical water channel, might never occur. Categorical derivation restricts Functions to silos of
their own classification—fine for discovering
them in the analysis process; dead wrong for responding to them in the synthesis process.
Functions are excellent information elements
to work with; a categorically derived Function
Structure is not. A proper structure will use
Functions as information elements, but will associate them on the basis that they ought to be
considered together in the process of concept
creation.
Discrimination Variables
If the intrinsic characteristics embodied in a categorical derivation are not ideal organizing agents
for synthesis, what are? The example of the parrots and the monkeys suggests extrinsic characteristics of particular concern to the purpose of
the project.
Planning and designing projects are extensively concerned with ideas—solutions and partial solutions to individual problems. If
ideas—call them Solution Elements—are used as
the extrinsic variables for organization, then
Functions will be linked on the basis of shared
solution. Two Functions will interact if Solution
Elements in enough numbers work for one as
well as the other. Linkage built up like this puts
Functions together that ought to be considered
together because they have potential solutions in
common—serendipitous association. In such a
rich context of association, ideas can be modified
and fine-tuned to a degree of elegance that marks
solutions that solve multiple problems! An information structure built around this kind of association meets the needs of creative synthesis.
Solution Elements as discrimination variables
can do more. Just as disagreement could be reg-

Charles L. Owen Organizing for Innovation

5

An Interaction Measure
All ideas of interest to Function A

+

Ideas
that work
(support)

Ideas
that cause
problems
(obstruct)

0
ideas that have
nothing to do
with the Function
(no effect)
Figure 1 Classification of Ideas for a Function

Equivalent diagram rearranged
to show proper nine regions

Directly combined diagrams.
(Flawed because too many [–,–] regions)

A

B

A

B

,
+, 0
+, 0 +,
,0

+,+

,

+,

,+ 0 ,+
0,

0 ,0

Figure 2 Modifying a Venn Diagram to Obtain Proper Regional Representation

+,+

,0

0 ,+

,+
,

0,

0 ,0

November, 2008

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

istered between monkey and parrot on the basis
of food incompatibility, conflict can be recognized between Functions based on Solution Element incompatibility. When a Solution Element
supports (helps to fulfill) one Function, but obstructs (makes it hard to fulfill) another Function, the two Functions are in conflict for that
Solution Element. The planner needs to see these
Functions together also—in order to avoid solutions that contribute to system problems. An idea
that is so alluring that it can’t be passed by may
also have negatives easily forgotten in the celebration of the positives. Recognition of the association as a conflict marks a Solution Element
and associated Functions as a problem for consideration and adds to the strength of the bond
between the Functions.

Diagrams will help to explain the interaction
concept. In Figure 1, a "function space" is described as a means to classify how all ideas in a
project relate to a particular function; call it
Function A. In the center region, are all the ideas
that work for the function (i.e., support its fulfillment: +). In the outer ring are all the ideas that
might cause a problem for the function (i.e., obstruct its fulfillment: –). Ideas that neither support nor obstruct Function A are outside the
bull’s-eye diagram (i.e., no effect: 0).
To build a model of interaction, the diagram
for Function A’s classified ideas is combined
with a similar diagram for the ideas of a second
function, Function B. The diagram on the left of
Figure 2 shows what happens if the two diagrams are simply overlapped like a Venn diagram. Because A and B each have three separate
regions, the combined diagram should have 3 x
3 or nine regions. It doesn’t. Because of the
concentric-circle bull’s-eye geometry, there is an
extra (–,–) region. Moving the central regions to
the edges of the diagrams retains the integrity of
the regions while making it possible to combine
the diagrams into one with the proper nine regions. It is shown on the right. The +,–,0 labels,
now used together, show how each region simultaneously classifies ideas for both functions, left
symbol for their relation to Function A, right for
Function B.
In Figure 3, the diagram is explained as a
model of interaction. Only five of the nine regions are applicable for the kind of interaction
we want—many more kinds of interaction can be

Charles L. Owen Organizing for Innovation

The generalized model for Interaction:

A

Regions of Independence
where Solution Elements (ideas) support one
Function, but have no effect on the other

B
+, 0

+,+

+,
,0

0 ,+
Region of Reinforcement
where Solution Elements support both Functions

,+
,
0 ,0

Regions of Conflict
where Solution Elements support one Function,
but obstruct the other

0,

Interaction =

Reinforcement + Conflict
Reinforcement + Conflict + Independence

Figure 3 The Interaction Measure

defined from this model, but the one pertinent to
innovative planning and design focuses on the
five regions that have at least one + sign in their
labels. These are the only regions from which an
idea might be selected for consideration in the
little two-function project represented. Ideas in
the other regions (which may be positive for
other functions) would not be chosen because
they either have nothing to do with the project at
hand (0) or actively obstruct one or both of the
functions (–).
Intuitively, the amount of interaction between
the two functions—the strength of association
suggesting how strongly they should be considered together—is proportional to the number and
value of the ideas in the three regions common
to both functions, relative to the number and

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

6

value of the ideas in all five regions. In Structured Planning, this measure is quantified to
allow Solution Element ideas to be scored on a
scale that registers positive support, negative obstruction or no effect for a function. A computer
program, RELATN, calculates the amount of interaction for each pair of functions and creates a
graph showing how functions are linked and,
therefore, which should be considered together.
For innovation, the measure uniquely associates the right kinds of information elements
(Functions) using the right kind of discriminating
variables (Solution Elements), while combining
reinforcement as a value promoting multifunctional solution with conflict as a value detecting
sources of potential solution failure.

