Institute of Design
Illinois Institute of Technology
Chicago, Illinois U.S.A

Context for Creativity
Charles L. Owen
Distinguished Professor of Design

(Adapted from a paper given at the National Design Engineering Conference
held in Chicago, Illinois on April 10, 1991. Published in: Design Studies [England]
13, No. 3 (1992): 216-228; and Design Processes Newsletter 4, No. 4 (1992):
1-6)

Abstract

A simplistic and seriously misleading myth about creative thinking is that creative
processes are exclusive alternatives to systematic processes. In fact, breakthrough
thinking almost always is preceded by extensive preparation, and the order in which
issues are considered has much to do with how they are resolved. A better way to think
about creativity and design is to think about how to place the different styles of lateral
and vertical thinking together in a process that takes best advantage of both at
appropriate times.
A design process, Structured Planning, is examined in this article for how it embeds
concepts of preparation and manipulation from the classic creativity model in its
systematic scheme. Its Action Analysis phase exhaustively catalogs the functions
necessary for a successful design while, at the time of identification, uncovering insights
and capturing ideas for creative ways to perform the functions. Its Structuring phase
organizes the functions for systematic consideration, but does so in a way that supports
invention by clustering functions in groups that are frequently counter-intuitive, but
ought to be considered as groups because they have potential solutions of common
interest. The result, an information structure specialized for inventive design, defies the
natural tendency to a priori categorization.

Introduction

Most people are creative—at least they probably were. Our schools, institutions
and businesses tend to wither natural creativity, but fortunately for many, a little
nurturing can bring back the knack.
That’s the good news. The bad news is that random creativity, particularly in
business, won’t be enough in the new economic world.
The trouble is, you just can’t invent or discover at whim. The myth that creative
people deliver brilliant ideas on demand discourages otherwise perfectly able
people from trying. The fact is that ideas seldom come without extensive
preparation. Edison and many others before and since have said it in one form or
another, "Genius is one percent inspiration and ninety-nine percent perspiration"
[Evans 1968, 266]. Yet, the creative element obviously is very important. How can
inspiration and perspiration be deployed optimally?

1

Psychologists have probed the perplexities of creativity since the discipline was
formalized. Most agree on a similar set of states or stages that an individual
passes through in developing an idea. Typically, these are [Fabun 1968, 9-12]:
1. Desire
2. Preparation
3. Manipulation
4. Incubation
5. Intimation
6. Illumination
7. Verification
There is necessarily also a "0" stage that is concerned with life preparation—it is
easier for those with broad interests to make creative associations. Nearly all agree
that wide-ranging experience is beneficial to the creative individual, simply because
it provides a base of analogies and metaphors upon which to draw. From a methodological viewpoint, unfortunately, there is little to be done in the way of life
preparation. Except that the use of teams extends the range of experience
available, life preparation is generally outside the purview of a design project.
Stage 2 preparation, however—that part related to the project—is of great
importance to the creative process. Here and in the manipulation stage, Edison’s
observation can be put to work to set in motion reliable, predictable invention, as
close to on-demand creativity as I know how to achieve.
After years of experimentation, our experience at the Institute of Design suggests
that the way that information is assembled and organized in a project is absolutely
critical to the creative quality of the result. To bend a phrase, creativity ignores a
vacuum.
First, insights must be sought throughout the search for information, and ideas
must be teased from them as they occur. Second, information must be organized
properly, so that ideas can be merged, modified and expanded in direct association
with the right problems to be addressed.
A process developed at the Institute of Design, called Structured Planning [Owen
1988], includes techniques for a complete process of problem description,
information collection, organization and ideation. In this paper, I will discuss
ideation as it is incorporated in Structured Planning, viewing the process through
the psychologist’s model of the stages of preparation and manipulation in the
creative process.

Preparation

Action
Analysis

"As the first step toward satisfying the desire, both pertinent and seemingly impertinent
information are gathered. This may be through research, experimentation or exposure to
experience. ... The process is analytical, and is a way of ’making the strange familiar’"
[Fabun 1968, 10].

In the Structured Planning process, the collection of detailed information for a
project is done with a technique called Action Analysis. Action Analysis achieves its
value from the thoroughness with which it seeks out the Functions that must be
performed by the system being designed (I will call the object of design a "system",
even though it may be any kind of entity—hardware or software, artifact or
institution). The objectives of Action Analysis are to identify as many as possible of
the Functions that the system should perform (or have performed to it) and to gain
as many insights as possible about what goes wrong or right as these Functions
are performed.
2

To achieve the objectives, the design team undertakes a top-down analysis, establishing for the system a Function Structure breaking down all actions into three hierarchical levels of operation. Figure 1 shows a simplified, partially filled-in Function
Structure for a housing system project in which the challenge was to design a
"house of the future" embodying state-of-the-art communication and control
technology.

Housing System
Mode
Level

Use
Submode

Activity
Level

Cooking

Function
Level

Grill food
Bake food
Fry food

.
.

Mode

Mode

Food Preparation
Activity

Activity

Subactivity

Subactivity

Function

Function

Function

Function

Function

Function

Figure 1. A three-level, top-down analysis is used to find Functions that cover the requirements of a
system. The result is a Function Structure.

Modes of operation, or Modes, are at the highest level. These are usually very
distinct states that the system goes through from the time it is produced until it is
retired. There are relatively few possibilities, although the selection varies for every
system. Some of the more typical Modes considered are:
• Production
• Distribution
• Specification
• Transport
• Sale
• Use
• Storage
• Maintenance
• Repair
• Adaptation
• Retirement
There may also be Submodes, if necessary, for some Modes. The Use Mode is a
frequent candidate for Submode treatment because a system often has a range of
uses under different conditions.
The middle level of the hierarchy is the Activity level. For any Mode of operation, it
is usually possible to describe several Activities that occur in accomplishing the
purpose of the Mode (for example, Loading, Transiting and Unloading for the
Transport Mode). Activities are defined as "purposeful performances" in Action
Analysis. The use of the theater metaphor is very intentional. Thought of as scenes
of a play, Activities can be characterized nicely and distinctively and, therefore,
may be described relatively precisely.
For a theatrical scene, there are players, props and a set. In an Activity, there are
users (players), system components that the users work with (props), and environ3

mental components that are not involved directly, but place conditions on the
system (the set).
Once an Activity is described, it is relatively easy to go to the next level to identify
the actions that are performed during the Activity, both by the system and by users
operating the system. In keeping with design nomenclature, the actions are
described as Functions— System Functions or User Functions, depending on
whether they are performed by the system or by the user. This Function level is the
third and lowest level of the Action Analysis hierarchy. At this level we attain the
level of detail necessary to meet the goal of the analysis, uncovering the Functions
that must be performed. Thorough coverage means thorough design. Careful
preparation of a Function Structure produces the foundation we need for a creative,
holistic approach to concept development.

Action Analysis
Originator

Activity/Event:

10

Cooking

Project

Mode

C. Owen

Housing System

Use (Submode: Food Preparation)

Users

System Components

Environmental Components

Cook
Cooking helpers

Stove
Oven
Microwave oven
Pots and pans
Recipes
Food ingredients
Refrigerator
Freezer
Utensils
Work surfaces

Work surfaces
Task lighting
Sinks
Storage units
Garbage disposal
Used and unused vessels

System Functions

Associated Design Factors

25. Grill food
26. Bake food
27. Fry food
28. Boil food
29. Steam food
30. Heat food
32. Defrost food
33. Cool food
34. Freeze food
35. Check progress
36. Clean utensils and containers
37. Transfer foods between
containers
38. Set up controls
39. Dispose of garbage
40. Stir pots
41. Add ingredients

50. Process-dependent tests

51. Initialization Uncertainty

User Functions

Associated Design Factors

42. Prepare sauces
43. Consult recipes
44. Prepare servings

52. Ingredients don’t mix
53. Non-linear scaling

Figure 2. The Action Analysis information collecting form is used to identify
Functions for an activity and associate insights, as Design Factors, with
them. Design Factor 51, for example, is associated with Function 38.

Requirement
and Insight

The Function Structure is, in a sense, a catalog of requirements for the system. If
the system is to perform well, it must fulfill all of the Functions. The design question
is, of course, "how?" At this point it is important to abandon the old model of the
4

design process as one that proceeds linearly or iteratively through the phases of
analysis, synthesis and evaluation. Insight and idea go hand in hand. When
insights are obtained, it is crucial to capture the ideas that may follow naturally.
As Activities are described and functions specified in the Action Analysis process,
insights are also sought in the immediacy of the moment. On the Action Analysis
form (Fig. 2) used to analyze Activities (and develop the information for the
Function Structure), there is a section for what are called Design Factors
juxtaposed to the list of Functions. Design Factors are documents developing
insights about Functions. They are titled next to the Function (or Functions) to
which they refer.
At this stage of preparation—what would be analysis in the classic model—the
creative process begins in the Structured Planning process. The generation of
Design Factors forces the interplay of insight and idea at the micro-level associated
with individual Functions.

Design Factors

Several features characterize the Design Factor document.
First, a Design Factor is a document. It has source and reference information, as
well as discussion material and illustrations. Second, it contains information about
both insight and ideas. In one place, the source for ideas and the ideas themselves
are recorded. Third, it is qualitative. Quantitative information can be incorporated,
but the emphasis is on insight, described in the way most appropriate—generally in
prose, with mathematical and/or graphic illustrations where useful.
In the Design Factor there resides a model for a corporate or institutional memory
associated with the "why’s" rather than the "what’s" of project histories. Ideas and
the insights that produced them are the diamonds among the enormous amounts of
"data dust" accumulated by corporations and institutions. Billions of dollars must be
lost every year by corporations that recreate the wheel over and over again
because ideas and insights locked in the heads of employees leave with them as
they retire or go to other jobs.
A Design Factor (Fig. 3) has two major parts, subdivisions for each, and several
reference sections. The first major part is about insight; its two subdivisions are
Observation and Extension. An Observation is a succinct statement of the insight,
distilled to its essence—a silver bullet. The Extension fills in the details, examines
causes and effects or, less certainly, conditions and tendencies. Essentially
unbounded, the Extension section provides a forum for discussion of related
information and the exploration of reasons for the Observation. It answers why
questions as thoroughly as possible.
The second major part is concerned with ideas. It also consists of two sections:
Design Implications and Speculations. Project implications of the insight are drawn
here, first, to strategies for solution and, then, to specific concepts. Design Implications are strategic, suggesting directions in which to seek solutions. Speculations
are tactical, expressing tangible, concrete ideas that, while still speculative at this
early stage of the design process, are well enough formed to be able to be
evaluated for how they might contribute to fulfilling any Function.
Figure 3 is a typical example of a Design Factor. Through it we can see how the
process distills data into information, explores it for understanding, and then
extracts strategies and ideas.
5

Design Factor

Title:

51

Initialization Uncertainty

Originator

Source/s

Associated Functions

C. Owen

1. Anderson, Robert M. The
Art of Cooking. London: Acme
Press, Ltd., 1973.

38. Set up controls

Project

Housing System
Mode

Use (Submode: Food Preparation)

2. Keeley, Laura G. Design Considerations for Cooking Appliances. Appliance Technology
3, No. 4 (April 1989): 47-50.

Activity

Cooking
Observation

Extension

Because of the physical differences in the way heat is produced and applied, it is difficult
to know when a cooking device
is "ready" at a desired temperature.

The speed that a cooking device achieves in coming to a desired temperature is partly a function of the heating process and partly a function of the form and material of the cooking vessel. Gas heat is very
quickly set; electric heat is very slow to develop -- or dissipate. Ovens
require time to absorb heat so that they can come to an equilibrium.
Microwaves induce heat quickly in the food. Induction heaters heat
cooking vessels quickly (Anderson 1973, 137). In most cases, there is
no real indication of the temperature at the moment or the amount of
heat being delivered. Ovens are, perhaps, the most reliable in this
regard -- particularly if there are means for preventing hot spots
(Keeley 1989, 48).
The problem presented is one of initialization. If a measuring system
is to use time as its variable, it is important to know when the proper
temperature has been reached in order to predict when the food will
be done.

Design Implications

Speculations

Sense heat in cooking containers.

84. Micro Sampler

Regulate heat by feedback.

62. Feedback-Controlled Heating.

Figure 3. A Design Factor records an insight about a Function. It also
applies the insight to the generation of ideas (Speculations) for how to fulfill
the Function.

The Observation comes from reflection about the Function Set up controls. This
action takes place as food is placed in an appliance for cooking. The essence of
the insight is that the application of heat at the right temperature to food is not
instantaneous; it arrives at different times and rates depending on cooking process
and equipment. The Extension explores this insight with examples of process and
equipment and draws some conclusions about establishing initialization times for
cooking processes that use time as the control variable.
Design Implications set two strategies for using the insight in a computer-supported
food preparation system. Sense heat in cooking containers suggests building
sensing devices directly into the cooking process, in some way allowing the system
to read temperatures directly in the food being cooked. Regulate heat by
feedback goes farther to suggest using knowledge of state to vary the rate of heat
delivery, thus speeding up the initialization phase as well as stabilizing the cooking
process.
For the two Design Implications, there are two specific ideas—Speculations—that
might actually be used in the final design. A Micro Sampler is a probe that can be
inserted automatically into a container from within the cooking unit. Heat on
6

Demand is a procedural idea that places all heating processes in the control of a
system director that executes the recipe along with many other food preparation
functions.

Manipulative
Preparation

As a Design Factor is written, a form of manipulation takes place—even though this
is still what the psychologists technically would call the preparation phase. The
separation of the idea part of the document into Design Implications and Speculations generates a tension between abstract and concrete that may be manipulated.
Paradoxically, as a first step toward an idea, it is almost always better to back
away. Rather than directly attempt a solution, it is better to begin from a more
abstract position. "What is a good way to use this information?" (from the Insight
and Extension). "What different strategies can be employed?" Almost always, there
is more than one way to approach solution—frequently, there are radically different
perspectives.
The abstraction ladder runs from general strategy to specific idea. In the middle is
the topical strategy. Design Implications in the Design Factor document are topical
strategies (strategies specific to the insight at hand); Speculations are specific
ideas.
Because general strategies apply to all problems and opportunities, they are good
to begin with. They reflect fundamentally different problem-solving approaches.
More can always be created because of the richness of natural language, but ten
good ones are:
• Confront the problem
• Overwhelm the problem
• Avoid the problem
• Remove the source of the problem
• Circumvent the problem
• Isolate the problem
• Turn the problem aside
• Invert the problem
• Divide the problem
• Hide the problem
To develop a Design Implication, a general strategy is chosen and a topical
strategy is derived from it. The question is asked, "What would be a good example
of the application of general strategy X to the insight of this Design Factor?" For
our example Design Factor, the general strategy Circumvent the problem yields
the Design Implication, Sense heat in cooking containers. General strategy
Overwhelm the problem suggests Regulate heat by feedback.
Continuing down the abstraction ladder, the Design Implications are used to
generate Speculations. "What specific idea might result from the application of this
Design Implication?" Speculations are formatted as noun phrases, usually with an
evocative adjective or adjective phrase preceding the noun name. Noun phrases
are best for conjuring and retrieving images, so they are the choice for denoting
ideas. Moreover, the more evocative the description, the more memorable the idea
will be. Synectics, Inc. recognized the importance of this early in the development
of their techniques for group creativity. Evocative adjective-noun descriptions are
called for as "Book Titles" in one stage of their "excursion" procedure for making
the familiar strange.
"In form, a Book Title is a two-word phrase that captures both an essence and a paradox
involved in a particular thing or set of feelings. The combination of an adjective and a
noun is the most workable form" [Prince 1970, 95].

7

"The two-word statement to capture the essence with a paradox is not new. Many book
titles, not surprisingly, qualify. Originally, we called this step symbolic analogy and
thought of it differently. It developed when we asked team members to characterize a
thing (like a closure) in a compressed way. To explain what we wanted, we would say
’Pretend you have written a whole book about closures. Think of a two-word, poetic title
for your book without the word closure.’ One title that would qualify: Penetrable Barrier"
[Prince 1970, 138].

Once a Design Implication has been derived and a Speculation invented, the
inherent tension in the description system can be exploited. "What is another way
to express the Design Implication?" (another Speculation from the operative Design
Implication). "What other strategies might be employed to use the insight?" (other
Design Implications). Thoughtful, open-minded manipulation of this tension between
abstract and concrete is capable of generating a wealth of specific ideas to fulfill
the Function at issue. Generation of the Design Factor and its Speculations at the
time of analysis—in the preparation stage—assures the freshest use of the
information, at the time it is obtained.

Manipulation

"Now, with all this material before him—in his mind, on the workbench, or in piles of
notes on slips of paper—the creative person begins to try to find some new pattern. he
pokes at the material, shuffles it around, turns it upside down, looks at it sideways. ...
The manipulative process is an attempt at synthesis, the putting together of hitherto
unrelated concepts, and what it hopes to do is ’to make the familiar strange’" [Fabun
1968, 10]

In the Structured Planning process, a major manipulation activity is the creation of
an Information Structure that places Functions together that ought to be seen
together not because they are classified together in predetermined categories, but
because they share interest in potential solutions —the Speculations already
invented in large numbers.
If a project has even a moderate number of Functions to be considered, some
attempt to organize them will be necessary. The conventional way is to find a set of
categories that cover the subject well and assign Functions to them. That is what
we do in using Action Analysis to create a Function Structure. For the design of a
housing system, this might be the Modes, Activities and Functions revealed through
Action Analysis, or it might be traditional and familiar categories such as structural,
electrical, plumbing, hvac (heating, ventilating and cooling), etc. Either way, the
process is logical, very important in the preparation phase—and totally wrong for
creative synthesis! Using such a model to organize design as opposed to
information collecting activities virtually guarantees that the only inventive solutions
that will cross subject categories will be those that are produced accidentally.
The organization principle needed is one that relates Functions on the basis that
they share interest in ideas—no matter in what descriptive category they may fit.
Christopher Alexander [Alexander 1964] identified the operative concept. Two
Functions are related, or interact, for the purposes of design if there is a significant
number of ideas that would tend to fulfill both, or there are ideas that would fulfill
one, but if used in the final concept, would make it difficult to fulfill the other. Either
way, the designer would like to consider these Functions together. In the first case,
subtle refinement might make it possible to use a few ideas to fulfill several
Functions inventively and elegantly. In the second case, modification of obstructive
ideas or selection of alternative ideas might prevent design failures otherwise
difficult to foresee.
Computer programs in the Structured Planning process (RELATN and VTCON)
enable a design team to create an Information Structure optimized for bottom-up
design considerations based on this concept. The RELATN program produces a
graph of Functions, using decision data provided by the design team about how the
Speculations support or obstruct fulfillment of the Functions (Fig. 4). The VTCON
8

program decomposes the graph to find clusters of Functions that are highly interrelated and, then, clusters the clusters to create an inclusion hierarchy that progressively reassembles the Functions into a structure representing the total project
(Figs. 5 and 6).

47

48

26
110
100

95

42

112

21

38

120

101

43

94
35

45
Figure 4. Links determined by the RELATN program relate Functions (vertices) in
a graph. (optimally arranged in this example so that groupings can be seen by
inspection).

47

101
95

107
103

110

104 100

48

26

42

112

21

38

120

101

108

43

94

105
35

102

45

106

Figure 5. The VTCON program finds clusters of Functions that are highly interlinked. Cluster
notation denotes both level and cluster number (i.e., 104 is level 1 cluster 4).

9

401

Condensation
Clusters

303
201

204
Primary
Clusters
Functions

301

302

202 203 205

104 105 101 102 103 106 107 108
94
95
100

43
94
100

35
38
42
43
110

35
38
42
120

42
112
120

45
101
120

47
48
112

21
26
48

Figure 6. Hierarchical clustering by the VTCON program produces an organization of the entire set of
Functions—an Information Structure.

Setting the
View

Other computer programs in the Structured Planning process help to pull together
appropriate Design Factors, Speculations and Functions as they are needed in
team synthesis sessions. The important thing is that the inspirations for innovative
concepts are now where they should be, associated with Functions that should be
considered together.
Figure 7 is an example of a second level cluster from an Information Structure
constructed for the housing system project. The Functions from three first level
clusters are visible. The diagram shows the linkage between the Functions (with
the strength of link given on a 0 to 1 scale—indicating the degree of interaction or
independence of the Functions with regard to all the Speculations thought of for the
project). Shown for each Function also are the Speculations that support (or
obstruct) it and the Design Factors associated with it.
While correct in form, this example (like all of the other structural figures) has been
purposely simplified for this discussion. Typically, most clusters are larger, and
Functions have many more associated Speculations because Speculations
invented for Functions not in this cluster may also have been recognized as
supporting (or obstructing) these Functions.
The design team uses the Information Structure to organize the synthesis activity.
From the juxtaposition of Functions and the concatenation/modification of Speculations conceived over all the information gathering activity, come composite,
interesting ideas. Design Factors not only stimulate new ideas through the juxtapositions, but provide bases for evaluation as the new ideas are generated. A flexible,
fluid, conjectural/evaluative paradigm for creativity is naturally supported.

10

201
84

XX Design Factor

62
61

110 Adjust
Recipe

YY Function

.51

84

.36

62

42 Prepare
Sauces
.38

112 Serve
Diners

.61

.62

83

.51

.51

90

.59

.37

155

38 Set Up .50
Controls

.37
83

.50

35 Check
Progress

62
84

84
90

50 ProcessDependent Tests

62
120 Hold
Temperature

90

62 FeedbackControlled
Heating
83 Multiple
Condition
Sensor

.54

43 Consult
.54
Recipes

53 Non-linear
Scaling

61 Heated
Mixer

84

83
90

.46

83

Speculations

52 Ingredients
Don’t Mix

90

84 Micro
Sampler
90 Recipe
Advisor

83
84

51 Initialization
Uncertainty

155 Weekly
Advisor

Figure 7. A 2nd level cluster with associated Speculations and Design Factors.

Summary

Contrary to general opinion, creative thinking is not confined to the few. It can be
systematically implemented and employed with great success to develop concepts
for new products, systems, artifacts and institutions.
The key to successful implementation is integrating insight and idea early in the
information collection activity, and then building on that duality as the project
develops. The preparation and manipulation stages of the classic creativity model
indeed may require Edison’s 99 percent perspiration, but treated with a little insight
themselves, they make that 1 percent inspiration easy to attain.
In Structured Planning, preparation and manipulation are reconsidered to include
specialized idea generating activities. Two important concepts are at the heart of
the process. First, insight is critical to creativity, and elements of information must
contain both insight and application of insight. Second, the organization of
information must support creative reach; things should be considered together that
have potential solution together—whatever their conventional classification. Out of
strange associations come novel ideas.

References

1. Evans, Bergen. Dictionary of Quotations. New York: Delacorte Press, 1968.
Evans describes the quote only as being given by Thomas Alva Edison in a
newspaper interview.
2. Fabun, Don, Ed. The World of An + Bn ⇔ C! You and Creativity. Kaiser
Aluminum News 25, No. 3 (1968): 9-16.
3. Owen, Charles. Structured Planning, A Concept Formation Process.
Chicago: Design Processes Laboratory, Institute of Design, IIT, 1988.
4. Prince, George M. The Practice of Creativity. New York: Macmillan, 1970.
5. Alexander, Christopher. Notes on the Synthesis of Form. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1964.
11

12

