Learn more: www.id.iit.edu

is a center for advanced study in human-centered innovation.

Founded as the New Bauhaus in 1937, Chicago’s Institute of Design, IIT

ILLINOIS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Institute of Design

What Is Design?
Some Questions and Answers

Charles L. Owen

September, 2004

Charles L. Owen What Is Design?

Keywords: design, design planning, product design, communications design,
design education, Institute of Design

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology
What Is Design?
/ Charles L. Owen / 2004

2

Charles L. Owen What Is Design?

The word "design" is used
and abused with great
indifference to meaning. What
does it mean? –to designers?
–to design educators? –and, in
particular, to the Institute of
Design?

3

What is design?
Design is a profession that is concerned with the creation of
products, systems, communications and services that satisfy
human needs, improve people’s lives and do all of this with
respect for the welfare of the natural environment. From kitchen
utensils to computer systems, from print communications to
exhibitions, web sites and information systems, design affects the
way in which all people live, work and play. Design involves
problem finding, problem solving, analysis, invention and
evaluation guided by a deep sensitivity to environmental concerns
and human-centered aesthetic, cultural and functional needs.

Design and Art

Product Design and Engineering
What is product design and how is it different from
engineering?
Product design and engineering are both concerned with the
planning, development and production of products—simple ones
like can openers and others that are actually complex systems of
products such as cars, airplanes and whole transportation systems.
Product designers tend to concentrate on the needs of people and
the ways in which products can be made safe, easy to use, and a
comfortable fit with the way people live. Human factors design
and human-centered design are terms used in design to highlight
the special concern of the product designer with the problems of
improving the quality of man-machine relationships.
Engineers concentrate more on the problems of making a
product work well for the functions it performs and optimizing its

September, 2004

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

How are designers and artists different?
Designers generally work objectively on teams (sometimes as
individuals) to create the products, systems, communications and
services needed by society. They are outer-directed, work for
others, and use a wide range of design and planning tools to
collect and organize information in the process of developing the
things people need and want to improve their quality of life.
Product designers work primarily with artifacts, systems and
hardware; communications designers work mostly with messages,
information systems and software. Both frequently work with
professionals from other disciplines in the development of
complex systems requiring broad expertise.
Artists work mostly subjectively with the motivation of
self-expression to produce works fulfilling aesthetic and
intellectually stimulating objectives. They are inner-directed,
usually work for themselves (or individual clients), and use
primarily intuitive and personally developed skills. Some
techniques and processes overlap (the perceived similarity
between designers and artists stems from a common use of visual
media to communicate ideas), but the fundamental methods,
results and—most important—goals are quite different.

Charles L. Owen What Is Design?

design for production. Product designers deal with concept, human factors,
appearance and performance; engineers work with details, functionality,
performance and production. In simplistic terms, it is sometimes said, "designers
work with thing-to-people relationships, engineers work with thing-to-thing
relationships". While their specializations differ, there is also considerable
common ground, and product designers and engineers frequently work together
on teams.

Communications Design
What is communications design and how is it different from
marketing or advertising?
Some of the techniques and vocabulary of advertising and communications
design are the same. Both use the elements of visual language—type, image,
color, texture and composition—to create visual messages. Marketing and
advertising are ultimately concerned with persuading consumers to purchase
products or services. Sometimes communications design is also directed to this
end, but there are many other applications for communications design. For
example, communications designers plan and develop exhibitions, publications
and information systems for industry and institutions. Educational materials,
multi-media productions and web sites are increasingly used in schools and to
support learning in growing fields of industrial training, continuing education,
and professional seminars. Conventional information systems including popular
magazines, text books, technical manuals and corporate communications all
require communications design to organize information, increase clarity, enhance
effectiveness and ensure reader satisfaction. New forms of communications also
need design, and communications designers are breaking new ground in the
exploding world of the Internet.

Design Planning

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

4

What is design planning and how does it differ from design
itself and other forms of planning?
Design planning is a term coined to collectively identify those aspects of design
devoted to the strategic, conceptual and methodological concerns of design. As
would be expected, design planning is more concerned with the initial activities
encountered in a design project: establishing purpose and fundamental directions,
exploring "what ends" the project should address (as opposed to "how" the ends
should be achieved), developing a concept, or plan, that can be the project
direction for detailed design activity, and assembling, customizing and/or creating
the process, methods and tools to conduct the project.
In distinction to other forms of planning, design planning is concerned
intimately with the nature of the product, system, service, institution, etc. being
planned. What it will be is of essential interest. A key product of the design
planning process will be a conceptual description of what is to be produced.
Supporting that, may be a financial plan for how to fund development and how
to price components and associated services, an implementation plan for how to
stage development and when to introduce offerings to the market, a marketing
plan for how to target niche markets and how to communicate product values—
and other plans as appropriate. All of these involve specialized skills and are
important to the overall business or institutional plan. The design planner may be
involved in developing any or all of them, but his or her primary responsibility is
the development of the conceptual plan, without which little else can be done.

Charles L. Owen What Is Design?

5

Design and Fashion
To what extent is design involved with fashion?
Among the general public, there is great confusion about the nature of design
because of the extensive use of the word "design" to mean fashion in advertising
avant-garde chic. Fashion design is taught in some schools which have programs
for clothing design, and some fashion designers have now extended their interests
to products other than clothing—toiletries, grooming aids, luggage—even
chocolates. Fashion designers are stylists, however, and as such must continually
seek new forms without regard for matters of functionality, performance, human
factors or almost any other concern. The confusion for the public arises from the
fact that other design professions also are concerned with issues of aesthetics.
The difference is that other design professions do not deal with aesthetics
exclusively, nor in a way that places highest priority on the whimsy of the
"new".

Design and Computer Technology
Are design professions using computer technology?
Almost all designers work extensively with computers. Some designers in the
most progressive corporate design departments and those working in leading
consulting offices are also involved in developing new uses for computers in
design. Computer-aided design (CAD) affects a wide range of design jobs, and
the even wider spectrum of computer-supported design is an area of intense
interest and research. Design support systems are among many subjects of
research at the Institute of Design; other schools are also beginning to include
subjects in their curricula that depend on computer technology. Students familiar
with the new processes employing computers are in increasing demand,
especially in the high technology industries, where they are also receiving
excellent salaries.

What is the job outlook in design?
As in other professions associated with industry, job opportunities for designers
are affected by business cycles. There are differences, however. Design, more
than many other professions, respects talent; and for young designers with solid
academic and professional records, there are almost always good opportunities.
Furthermore, the acceleration of change, the availability of new technology and
the growing needs of society and industry in a global economy increase the needs
for design continually. In contrast to a number of other professions, the number
of designers being educated is not out of proportion to the number of jobs
opening in the field each year. Finally, the mood of industry is changing to
express major interest in finding candidates for top management who have
experience in innovative thinking, problem finding and problem solving—the
things that designers do every day. Good designers get and will get good jobs.
September, 2004

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

Job Outlook

Charles L. Owen What Is Design?

Potential Earnings
How much money can designers earn?
Good designers—those who have prepared themselves with a good education and
who are motivated to succeed—have excellent opportunities for financial reward.
A young designer with a Master’s degree may start in a professional consulting
office at over $50,000; in a corporate design department the figure may be
slightly higher: nearer $60,000. Senior designers make appropriately higher
salaries, generally comparable to those of senior engineers, and design managers
have salary patterns similar to other departmental managers in most firms.
Owners of design offices, principal partners, and independent consultants are
limited only by their energy and ability; salaries at this level can be quite high.
Design graduates with specializations in design theory, methods and process
as well as the use of advanced computer techniques are increasingly being sought
by employers who recognize the growing importance of sophisticated design
thinking. Compensation is commensurate with preparation, but an additional
$5,000 to 10,000 per year has not been unusual for Institute of Design graduates
and, in general, salaries for these graduates parallel those for high-end
engineering fields.

Career Change
What about changing a career?
Design education is good education because it focuses on problem-finding and
problem-solving as general processes, with visualizing concepts, working with
teams and supporting team work with design methods as its specializations. This
is valuable nearly anywhere; and a good design education, therefore, is useful for
many professions. It is also an exciting way to pursue a career; and many
practicing design professionals, as you might expect, began their careers in other
fields. The range of activities within design is broad and extends from hands-on
research and development to management and planning.

Aptitude

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

6

What are some indications of design interests and aptitude?
Interest and aptitude for the design fields is sometimes hard to recognize.
However, the experience of design educators suggests that there are some general
characteristics that may identify a student with strong design potential. First,
there is a general interest in the physical world—in understanding the things of
the natural and man-made world, how they work, and how people relate to them.
Second, there is an ability to play with abstract concepts in visual imagery—or
mathematics, or language. Third, there is an inquisitive drive to fathom the
unknown—always asking why, how, and "what if". Children who dissect and
tinker with ideas and objects have the characteristic. Fourth, there is the ability to
visualize—to imagine new ideas and the ways in which concepts can be realized.
Fifth, there is general aptitude—the ability to bring reasoning skills to bear on
the solution of problems through logical thought processes. Sixth, there is an
overall enthusiasm and optimism about life and a belief in the importance and
possibility of creating change. Finally, there is the desire to "put it all
together"—rather than specializing, to find a career in which all talents and
abilities can be brought to bear.

Charles L. Owen What Is Design?

7

High School Preparation
What high school courses are good to take?
Well-prepared design students have broad interests and solid academic
backgrounds in mathematics, the physical sciences, social sciences and
humanities. To the extent possible, they will probably also have taken art,
technical drawing and other courses where they could broaden their preparation.
Students sometimes associate design with the fine arts and, incorrectly, plan their
high school education around "creative" craft and skill courses at the expense of
those in the academic category. While design requires creative and intuitive
thinking, it is also intellectual and demands rigorous, logical, informed thinking
to solve problems in the real world. The best prepared student is one who has
taken a demanding program with both depth and breadth and has done well
across the board.

What undergraduate preparation is best for a design career,
assuming additional graduate education?
In today’s world, a bachelor’s degree is often not enough. For the U.S. and other
more developed countries, the central thrust of the economy is moving from
service to knowledge industries. The shift is a continuation of trends that began
in the nineteenth century with movement of the primary "work" of the public
from agriculture to manufacturing and then manufacturing to services.
Manufacturing jobs are routinely passed on to developing countries now, and,
increasingly, service industry jobs are also moving offshore. The new emphasis
for the most developed countries is on those professions that create knowledge.
Design—and the emerging specialties of design, design research and design
planning—are central players in the knowledge professions along with the
sciences and research arms of many other fields. Given this context, it is wise to
consider preparation for a career in design from a longer perspective, assuming
from the beginning that graduate education will be desirable, even necessary. In
this longer view, a greater range of choices emerges for the first step,
undergraduate education.
In a world that seemingly values greater and greater specialization, design
professionals continue to benefit from broader and broader knowledge. Design is
one of the few professions in which one’s ability actually increases with age.
Experience and knowledge about many subjects allow creative justapositions of
ideas and innovative development of relationships simply not visible to those
whose knowledge is specialized and compartmented. Designers need to be
generalists in their approach to content, specialists in the application of the
methods of design. For a designer, more is more when it comes to knowledge.
So, a broad education is desirable, and an undergraduate education that opens
many doors—science, humanities, arts, technology—provides an excellent
foundation for a more specialized graduate education in design. The best
preparation, accordingly, would be a liberal arts program with careful additions
of elective courses in the sciences, arts and technology—or, a general engineering
program with careful additions of elective courses in the humanities and arts.
September, 2004

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

College Preparation (for Graduate School)

Charles L. Owen What Is Design?

Time to Degree
How long does it take to learn design?
Most design undergraduate programs are four years in length; some are five. In
parallel with required academic classes, programs typically allocate 1-2 years for
basic skills preparation and 2-3 years for professional preparation. Even after
graduating from one of the best programs, however, students should expect a 1-2
year period in the organization that hires them when they will learn the specific
procedures of the organization’s professional practice.
With the continuing maturation of the design professions, an increasing
number of students who study design as undergraduates are taking a two-year
professional Master’s program in design after their undergraduate program. The
program fulfilling this need at the Institute of Design is the MDes (Master of
Design), a terminal degree for those interested in professional development. Some
schools are also beginning to differentiate research and professional programs.
The Institute of Design now offers a one-year, special program (MDM, Master of
Design Methods) for experienced professionals desiring to learn and work with
the most recently developed theory and methods, and a PhD program (the first
PhD degree in design in the United States) for those interested in design research
and university-level teaching. The PhD requires a minimum of three years study
beyond the Master’s degree.
More and more often now, graduate design programs admit students with
undergraduate degrees in fields other than design (the Institute of Design has
done so since the 1950’s). In this case, there is usually a period of "removing
deficiencies" during which the student takes a fast track through selected
foundation courses to build enough skill and attain enough background
understanding to be able to succeed in graduate level classes. At the Institute of
Design, this foundation program takes one year. "Catch-up" then continues in a
mix of individual and team projects at the advanced level of the regular MDes
program.

Finding a Program

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

8

Where are design programs found?
Within universities, some programs are in colleges of fine arts, some in colleges
of architecture or engineering. Very rarely (the Institute of Design is one), there
are programs that are in full colleges or schools of design within a university.
There are also design programs in independent art schools and a few that are
totally independent in schools of their own. In general, design programs in
universities take better advantage of the resources available to provide the broad
range of preparation necessary to best support design as a process for concept
development and problem-solving. Programs in independent art schools tend to
treat design as craft, commercial art or form study. Independent schools usually
take a training approach rather than an educational one and concentrate
extensively on skills.

Selecting a School
How do you select a design program?
Selection of the design program that is "right" for you is very important and can
be difficult without some guidance. Schools differ in their approaches to design
and to design education. Among the more important issues to be considered are:

Charles L. Owen What Is Design?

9

student/faculty ratios, program flexibility, attitude toward academic studies,
design philosophy, up-to-dateness, breadth and depth of program, faculty
credentials, and alumni records.
Student/faculty ratios should be relatively low because many courses must be
taught in studio or "project learning" classes. Flexible programs allow students to
select more classes to meet their special goals. Some programs have little or no
academic content (mathematics, sciences, humanities, etc.); others have academic
as well as professional components. A wide range of design philosophies exist:
some schools treat design as exclusively the study of form; some emphasize
commercial skills; some are highly theoretical; some are very practical. Schools
vary considerably in their interest and ability to stay abreast of new technology—
most particularly, computer technology. In their approach to the subject matter of
design, some programs take a narrow view of what constitutes a field, others
encourage broad learning across design disciplines. Some programs offer only
basic courses, others have elective courses with in-depth specialties. Faculty
achievements professionally and academically may vary considerably; their work
will tell you a great deal about their approach to design and teaching. Finally, the
success of a school’s alumni says something about the quality of its preparation,
although time lag makes this more of a check of consistency.
It may seem difficult to obtain this kind of information, but conversations
with university personnel will usually reveal a great deal. Where possible, ask to
see Bachelor’s or Master’s level theses or reports of final comprehensive
projects; these show the work of the students at their best and also reveal some
of the interests and abilities of the faculty. Visit various schools, shop around,
compare notes and ask questions about the topics listed above.

Why is a good faculty important?
The quality of the educational experience is ultimately dependent on the quality
of the faculty. This is true in any discipline, but in design (and some other
programs where project-oriented learning is a primary educational method),
faculty quality is especially important. The reason is that much of design
education is hands-on, based on research, development, experiment, prototyping,
testing and criticism—rather than the conventional lecture/recitation/exercise
paradigm of classroom study. This means that the faculty must have experience,
broad academic preparation and the motivation to think and work directly with
students on projects for which answers are not known beforehand.
Experience establishes understanding of the business environment and the role
of design in the planning and implementation process. Academic preparation
provides the basis for a broad, generalist view of the problem-solving process.
Motivation stimulates the quest for excellence and encourages the patience
necessary to guide students through the trial and error process of learning to
discriminate between quality and mediocrity. Motivation tempers the desire to
achieve with an appreciation for what is worth doing; academic preparation
establishes the knowledge necessary to bring about change; and experience
guides the application of design process, methods and tools to the
accomplishment of meaningful results.
September, 2004

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

Faculty

Charles L. Owen What Is Design?

Portfolios
Is a portfolio important?
A portfolio is useful as an indication of interests and skill development. It is
required for some programs, particularly those in colleges of fine arts or
independent art schools. A portfolio is not required for entrance into IIT’s
Institute of Design and other programs with similar design philosophies.
Most important for the Institute of Design is strong academic preparation as
evidenced through performance. Broad interests and participation in a range of
activities are also valued, since design is a collaborative profession demanding
mature cooperation among team members. If an applicant has a portfolio, it is
useful for identifying strengths and weaknesses in visualizing skills; if an
applicant does not have a portfolio (as is usually the case for applicants with
degrees other than design), it is not a problem.

Learning More
How can I learn more about design?
Information about the design professions is available from many sources: public
lectures and exhibitions, professional societies, professional design offices and
corporate design departments, schools and universities and, of course, magazines
and books,
A sampling of interesting books that explore design would include:

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

10

• Vision in Motion. Laszlo Moholy-Nagy. Chicago: Paul Theobald and
Company, 1947.
• What Is Design? Paul Jacques Grillo. Chicago: Paul Theobald and
Company, 1960.
• The Nature of Design. David Pye. New York: Reinhold Publishing
Corporation, 1964.
• Problems of Design. George Nelson. 2d ed., New York: Whitney
Publications, Inc., 1965.
• Moholy-Nagy. Experiment in Totality. Sybyl Moholy-Nagy. 2d ed.,
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1969.
• Design. Serving the Needs of Man. George C. Beakley and Ernest G.
Chilton. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1974.
• How to See. A Guide to Reading Our Manmade Environment. George
Nelson. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1977.
• Design. Purpose, Form and Meaning. John F. Pile. Amherst, MA: The
University of Massachusetts Press, 1979.
• How Designers Think. Bryan Lawson. Westfield, NJ: Eastview Editions,
Inc., 1980.
• By Design. Why There Are No Locks on the Bathroom Doors in the
Hotel Louis XIV and Other Object Lessons. Ralph Caplan. New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 1982.
• 50 Jahre New Bauhaus. Bauhaus-Nachfolge In Chicago. Peter Hahn and
Lloyd C. Engelbrecht. (in German and English), Berlin, Germany: Argon Verlag
GmbH, 1987.
• Design Thinking. Peter G. Rowe. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1987.
• Design in Context. Penny Sparke. London: Chartwell Books, Inc., 1987.
• The American Design Adventure. Arthur J. Pulos. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press, 1988.

Charles L. Owen What Is Design?

11

• Eames Design. The Work of the Office of Charles and Ray Eames. John
Neuhart, Marilyn Neuhart and Ray Eames. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc.,
1989.
• Design Discourse. History, Theory, Criticism. Victor Margolin. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1989.
• New Thinking in Design. Conversations on Theory and Practice. C.
Thomas Mitchell. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1996.
Most designers are glad to respond to serious inquiries from students. Perhaps the
easiest way to get first-hand information, though, is to call a university or school
and talk with administrators or faculty members about opportunities in the design
fields. A letter of inquiry to a design program will usually return specific
information about programs and fields. Best of all—a visit—will answer many of
the questions raised above. The Institute of Design welcomes such inquiries.

Institute of Design
The Institute of Design is exclusively a graduate school. It offers programs of
study that lead to the Master of Design (MDes), Master of Design Methods
(MDM) and PhD in Design. All programs allow students to study design as an
integrated field with concentration in one or more areas of specialty. While
giving students a broad understanding of the theory, methods, knowledge and
practice of design, the programs are particularly concerned with two areas: design
planning, which deals with strategic issues, concept formation and the
methodology of planning; and human-centered design, specialized into product
design and communications design, both of which are concerned with tactical
design issues, the development of form and function, and human-factors
methodology applied to design in detail.
The school welcomes students with undergraduate degrees other than design.
The average age of entering students is usually around 27 to 29, and the makeup
of the student body is approximately half with design degrees, half with other
degrees; half from the U.S. and half from other countries. A goal is diversity of
background, both academic and cultural. Students with broad interpersonal
experiences will be better prepared for work in an increasingly interconnected
world.

Institute of Design
Illinois Institute of Technology
350 North LaSalle Street
Chicago, Illinois 60610, USA
Telephone: 312.595.4900

September, 2004

Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology http://www.id.iit.edu

For further information, please call or visit:

